Improve session docs (#1072)
solidjs/solid-docs: src/routes/solid-start/advanced/session.mdx

title: "Sessions"
---

Sessions allow web applications to maintain state between user requests.
Since HTTP is stateless, each request is treated independently.
Sessions address this by allowing the server to recognize multiple requests from the same user, which is helpful for tracking authentication and preferences.

## How sessions work

A session typically involves:

> 1. **Session creation**: When tracking is needed (e.g., upon login or first visit), the server creates a session.
>    This involves generating a unique **session ID** and storing the session data, _encrypted and signed_, within a cookie.
> 2. **Session cookie transmission**: The server sends a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header.
>    This instructs the browser to store the session cookie.
> 3. **Subsequent requests**: The browser automatically includes the session cookie in the `Cookie` HTTP header for requests to the server.
> 4. **Session retrieval and data access**: For each request, the server:
>    1. Checks for the session cookie.
>    2. Retrieves the session data if a cookie is present.
>    3. Decrypts and verifies the signature of the session data for the application to access and use this data.
> 5. **Session expiration and destruction**: Sessions typically expire after a period of time or upon user sign-out and the data is removed.
>    This is done by setting a `Max-Age` attribute on the cookie or by sending a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header with an expired date.

Reviewer: Only use ordered when you're referring to a list of steps that must be performed in order

```suggestion
1. **Session creation**: When tracking is needed (e.g., upon login or first visit), the server creates a session.
   This involves generating a unique **session ID** and storing the session data, _encrypted and signed_, within a cookie.
2. **Session cookie transmission**: The server sends a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header.
   This instructs the browser to store the session cookie.
3. **Subsequent requests**: The browser automatically includes the session cookie in the `Cookie` HTTP header for requests to the server.
4. **Session retrieval and data access**: For each request, the server:
   - Checks for the session cookie.
   - Retrieves the session data if a cookie is present.
   - Decrypts and verifies the signature of the session data for the application to access and use this data.
5. **Session expiration and destruction**: Sessions typically expire after a period of time or upon user sign-out and the data is removed.
   This is done by setting a `Max-Age` attribute on the cookie or by sending a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header with an expired date.
```

Author: The server **first** checks for session cookie, **then** retrieves the session data ...

It has an order.

Reviewer: Perhaps it should be just a decimal separated. Having a nested ordered list within a nested order list makes this feel a bit clunky

```suggestion
1. **Session creation**: When tracking is needed (e.g., upon login or first visit), the server creates a session.
   This involves generating a unique **session ID** and storing the session data, _encrypted and signed_, within a cookie.
2. **Session cookie transmission**: The server sends a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header.
   This instructs the browser to store the session cookie.
3. **Subsequent requests**: The browser automatically includes the session cookie in the `Cookie` HTTP header for requests to the server.
4. **Session retrieval and data access**: For each request, the server checks for the session cookie, retrieves the session data if a cookie is present, then decrypts and verifies the signature of the session data for the application to access and use this data.
5. **Session expiration and destruction**: Sessions typically expire after a period of time or upon user sign-out and the data is removed.
   This is done by setting a `Max-Age` attribute on the cookie or by sending a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header with an expired date.
```

title: "Sessions"
---

Sessions allow web applications to maintain state between user requests.

> Because HTTP is stateless, each request is treated independently.
> Sessions solve this by enabling the server to recognize a series of requests as coming from the same user.
> This is useful for tracking user authentication and preferences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since HTTP is stateless, each request is treated independently.
Sessions address this by allowing the server to recognize multiple requests from the same user, which is helpful for tracking authentication and preferences.
```

> This page provides an overview of working with sessions in SolidStart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## How sessions work

> A session typically involves:
> 
> 1. **Session creation**: When tracking is needed (e.g., upon login or first visit), the server creates a session.
>    This involves:
>    - Generating a unique **session ID**.
>    - Storing the session data _encrypted and signed_ within a cookie.
> 2. **Session cookie transmission**: The server sends a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header.
>    This instructs the browser to store the session cookie.
> 3. **Subsequent requests**: The browser automatically includes the session cookie in the `Cookie` HTTP header for requests to the server.
> 4. **Session retrieval and data access**: For each request, the server:
>    - Checks for the session cookie.
>    - Retrieves session data from the cookie.
>    - Decrypts and verifies the signature of the session data.
>    - Application code can access and use this data.
> 5. **Session expiration and destruction**: Sessions typically expire after a time or upon user logout.
>    Destruction involves instructing the browser to delete the session cookie (e.g., setting an expired `Set-Cookie`).

Reviewer: I'm a little iffy about the last point in 4 - it sounds a bit off being on its own.

```suggestion
A session typically involves:

1. **Session creation**: When tracking is needed (e.g., upon login or first visit), the server creates a session.
   This involves generating a unique **session ID** and storing the session data _encrypted and signed_ within a cookie.
2. **Session cookie transmission**: The server sends a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header.
   This instructs the browser to store the session cookie.
3. **Subsequent requests**: The browser automatically includes the session cookie in the `Cookie` HTTP header for requests to the server.
4. **Session retrieval and data access**: For each request, the server must:
   - Check for any session cookies,
   - Retrieve any session data if a cookie is present,
   - Decrypt and verify the signature of the session data for the application to access and use this data.
5. **Session expiration and destruction**: Sessions typically expire after period of time or upon user sign-out.
   The browser will delete the session cookie (e.g., setting an expired `Set-Cookie`) in order to destroy it.
```

Author: I don't agree with some of the suggestions:

1. In the fourth point, I would remove the "must" and change the bullet points accordingly. We shouldn't "instruct" on this page according to Diataxis and the suggestion has a little instructional tone.
2. In the fifth point, there is a comma at the items, is it a typo?
3. In the fifth point, this part is confusing:
    > The browser will delete the session cookie (e.g., setting an expired `Set-Cookie`) in order to destroy it.
    
    The browser doesn't set an expired `Set-Cookie` header to destroy the cookie. That's what the server does to signal the browser to destroy the cookie.
    
I think I get the heart of the suggestions. I will make some changes accordingly.

Most of these steps are automatically managed by [session helpers](#session-helpers).

### Database sessions

> For larger applications or when more robust session management is required, SolidStart also supports storing session data in a database.
> 
> This approach is similar to the cookie-based approach, but with some key differences:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For larger applications or when more robust session management is required, SolidStart also supports storing session data in a database.
This approach is similar to the cookie-based approach, but with some key differences:
```

1. A session ID is generated.
2. The session data is stored in the database, associated with the session ID.
3. Only the session ID is stored in the cookie.
4. The session data is retrieved from the database using the session ID.

> 5. Upon expiration, in addition to the session cookie, the database record containing the session data is also removed.

Reviewer: This might be better suited for a table instead of a list.
In addition, it probably doesn't have to be an ordered list since we aren't talking about a series of events here

Author: I'm not sure how a table can be used here. I think a bullet list is better. I made some change that hopefully makes this section more clear without using a table.

> Note that managing interactions with the database is not directly supported by SolidStart; you will need to implement this yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing interactions with a database is not directly supported by SolidStart; to implement this method, you would need to implement this yourself.
```

Author: I changed my mind about this line. "managing database interactions is not supported" might be misleading. Obviously SolidStart supports using a ORM or directly connecting to a database. Some runtimes have built-in drivers for some databases, so we can't even say "it's not **directly** supported".

Additionally I think "to implement this method" is redundant.

I propose this instead:

> SolidStart does not automatically handle interactions with a database; you need to implement this yourself.

## Session helpers

> [Vinxi](https://vinxi.vercel.app), the underlying server toolkit powering SolidStart, provides helpers to simplify working with sessions.
> 
> Here's an overview of the key session helpers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Vinxi](https://vinxi.vercel.app), the underlying server toolkit powering SolidStart, provides helpers to simplify working with sessions.
It provides a few key session helpers:
```

- [`useSession`](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/session.html#usesession): Initializes a session or retrieves the existing session and returns a session object.
- [`getSession`](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/session.html#getsession): Retrieves the current session or initializes a new session.
- [`updateSession`](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/session.html#updatesession): Updates data within the current session.
- [`clearSession`](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/session.html#clearsession): Clears the current session.

> These helpers only work in server-side contexts, such as within server functions and API routes.
> This is because session management requires access to server-side resources and the ability to get and set HTTP headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These helpers work _only_ in server-side contexts, such as within server functions and API routes.
This is because session management requires access to server-side resources as well as the ability to get and set HTTP headers.
```

> For more information, see the [Cookies documentation in Vinxi](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/session.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the [Cookies documentation in the Vinxi docs](https://vinxi.vercel.app/api/server/session.html).
```

## Creating a session

The `useSession` helper is the primary way to create and manage sessions.
It provides a comprehensive interface for all session operations.

```ts title="src/lib/session.ts"
import { useSession } from "vinxi/http";

type SessionData = {
	theme: "light" | "dark";
};

export async function useThemeSession() {
	"use server";
	const session = await useSession<SessionData>({
		password: process.env.SESSION_SECRET as string,
		name: "theme",
	});

> 	// Initialize the session if it doesn't have a value

Reviewer: Since this is in the advanced section, we're going to assume the user knows how to read code.
```suggestion
```

	if (!session.data.theme) {
		await session.update({
			theme: "light",
		});
	}

> 	// Return the session manager for later use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

	return session;
}
```

In this example, the `useThemeSession` server function creates a session that stores a user's theme preference.

`useSession` requires a strong password for encrypting and signing the session cookie.
This password must be at least 32 characters long and should be kept highly secure.

> It is strongly recommended to store this password in an environment variable, as shown in the example above, rather than hardcoding it in your source code.

Reviewer: I think we either need to elaborate whether we mean this needs to be public or privately stored (and then it can be linked to [this section](https://docs.solidjs.com/configuration/environment-variables#environment-variables))

Author: done

> You can generate a suitable password using a command like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A password can be generated using the following command:
```

```sh frame="none"
openssl rand -base64 32
```

`useSession` adds a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header to the current server response.

> By default, the cookie is named `h3`, but can be customized with the `name` option, as we did in the example above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the cookie is named `h3`, but can be customized with the `name` option, as shown in the example above.
```

## Getting session data

> The `useSession` helper provides access to the session data through the `data` property.

Reviewer: This feels like it needs a bit more info

Author: I feel the same, but I don't know what else to add

Reviewer: just going to merge this then we can figure out how to expand later

```ts title="src/lib/session.ts"
export async function getThemeSession() {
	"use server";
	const session = await useThemeSession();

	return session.data.theme;
}
```

## Updating session data

> The `useSession` helper provides an `update` method to modify session data.

Reviewer: Similar to here

```ts title="src/lib/session.ts"
export async function updateThemeSession(data: SessionData) {
	"use server";
	const session = await useThemeSession();

	await session.update(data);
}
```

## Clearing a session

> The `useSession` helper provides a `clear` method to destory the session.

Reviewer: Same comment as the two above
